Assignment_02.md, before:

# What have I learned about language, thought, and the relationships between them?

### Rafał Jaskulski

### Introduction

At the beginning of the "Language and Thought" course, I was faced with three questions that made me think about my
current perception of language, the process of language acquisition and the impact it has on our thinking. The first
question: "What knowledge do we have about our first (native) language? What do we know when we say we know a language?"
seemed by this time for me to be not that difficult to answer. My answer was based on the belief that mutual
comprehension is enough, which later turned out to be incomplete. The answer for the second question: "How do children
learn their first language between the ages 0 and 1" was also intuitive for me. I believed that children learn language
by listening to the speech of their parents and those around them. This perspective also turned out to be just the tip
of the iceberg compared to the topics we developed. For the last question: “Do you think that our language affects how
we think? Can you give an example of the connection between language and thought?” from the perspective of time I think
I answered accurately. I pointed out the differences between linguistic constructions, including: English and Polish,
which may affect the way we formulate and understand our thoughts. This belief was based on the observation that some
ideas and concepts are easier to express in one language than in another, which I think suggests that language has the
ability to shape the way we think.

Of all the topics covered in the course, I found the idea of the relationship between language and thinking the most
fascinating, especially in the context of the debate between the theories of liguists Steven Pinker and Lera Boroditsky.
In short, Pinker presents language as a tool for transmitting pre-formed thoughts, separate from language, while
Boroditsky emphasizes that language actively shapes the way we perceive and interpret the world. The clash of
perspectives and examples has made me more aware of the non-obvious relationships between language and thought, as well
as cases where language is omitted in creating a thought.

### The main idea

During class, we covered three main topics: languages and dialects, children's acquisition of their first language, and
the influence of language on formulating thoughts. The main idea that comes to mind when we combine these three topics
is to indicate language as a key tool that ensures our survival, acceptance in the group, development and domination
over other species, and the domination of some people over others. Our constant development has made the world so
complex that a single human mind, due to its limitations, is unable to fully comprehend it. However, we have developed
mechanisms that allow us not only to integrate with the world prepared by our ancestors, but also to collaborate in
shaping the world around us. This iterative approach, where existing knowledge is leveraged to generate new insights, is
depicted in *Figure 1*, symbolizing the transfer of knowledge across generations. However, every stick has two ends.
These mechanisms sometimes prove unreliable.

Topics discussed in the context of the book *The Knowledge Illusion* by Sloman and Fernbach (2017) revealed the tendency
of people to overestimate their knowledge and cognitive skills. Researchers have shown plenty of examples that show gaps
in people's analysis of information. One of the key experiments involved explaining the functioning of a toilet to
participants, with the results indicating that people tend to overestimate their knowledge even in basic matters.
Another example of such a tendency is the influence of social media on the results of the presidential elections in the
United States in 2016. Researchers found that during the presidential election period, there was more fake news on
Facebook favoring Donald Trump than Hillary Clinton. However, the authors of the article assessed that although the
presence of fake news was noticeable, their effectiveness in changing the electoral decision was limited. This shows
that some people, despite being exposed to false information, were able to verify it, and others, in accordance with the
idea of the "knowledge illusion", interpreted this information as true. The above example, in relation to the main idea,
shows how complex our world is, in which one group of people, already understanding certain information processing
mechanisms of the human mind. These people have discovered methods to intelligently, non-violently dominate the way of
thinking of other people.

Another interesting local phenomenon referring to the role of language as a tool for acceptance in a group is French
slang - Verlan. Researcher Rana Noor Mohamed examines the Académie Française's position on preserving the purity of the
French language and its reluctance to recognize Verlan as an integral part of it. This case relates to two parts of the
main idea. First, Verlan slang provides a sense of belonging for those who speak it, which from an evolutionary
perspective may increase our chances of survival by working with people who identify with them. On the other hand, the
position of the Académie Française shows how language can also be subject to domination towards groups of people.

The topic of the influence of language on the way of thinking is most interesting to me because of cases from everyday
life. For example, during conversations with my foreign-speaking friends, we compare English phrases and look for
equivalents of certain English constructions in our native languages. It turns out that some concepts are expressed more
precisely in one language and others in the other. Another interesting phenomenon I have observed is the use of first
language expressions translated literally into English. Loan translations may be incomprehensible to native English
speakers, but for those who speak French or German and have an equivalent expression, understanding is not an issue.
There are also cases in which it is difficult to look for equivalents in other languages. An example is the use of a
double negative, characteristic of Slavic languages. For me, as a person for whom Polish is my first language, such a
construction is natural and does not mean a double negation of thoughts. However, for a French-speaking person, such
wording makes no sense. In turn, the example structure of Verlan slang would be impossible to implement in Polish due to
the sound system. The French language, even if the words are reversed, remains fluent, while the Polish language would
become impossible to pronounce.

### Conclusion

A better grasp of why we use language and how it relates to our thoughts is certainly beneficial in daily life,
especially in my work as a programmer where clarity is essential in speech, writing, and code production. A fascinating
area for further investigation is the discrepancies that result from thinking in the first language compared to a later
acquired languages.

Allcott, Gentzkow, (2017). *Social Media and Fake News in the 2016 Election*

[https://www.nber.org/papers/w23089](https://www.nber.org/papers/w23089)

Mohamed, (2021). *Negotiating Alternative Linguistic Practices: The Struggle between Verlan Usage and the Académie
Française*

[https://makingsjournal.com/negotiating-alternative-linguistic-practices-the-struggle-between-verlan-usage-and-the-academie-francaise/](https://makingsjournal.com/negotiating-alternative-linguistic-practices-the-struggle-between-verlan-usage-and-the-academie-francaise/)

**Figure 1**

*Knowledge transfer*

![knowledge_transfer.png](What%20have%20I%20learned%20about%20language,%20thoughts,%20and%20%20acb743ba2c6e4f0287c7255bb9d36722/knowledge_transfer.png)

Commit message:

Add an example for idiom comprehension between languages

Assignment_02.md, after:

# What have I learned about language, thought, and the relationships between them?

### Rafał Jaskulski

### Introduction

At the beginning of the "Language and Thought" course, I was faced with three questions that made me think about my
current perception of language, the process of language acquisition and the impact it has on our thinking. The first
question: "What knowledge do we have about our first (native) language? What do we know when we say we know a language?"
seemed by this time for me to be not that difficult to answer. My answer was based on the belief that mutual
comprehension is enough, which later turned out to be incomplete. The answer for the second question: "How do children
learn their first language between the ages 0 and 1" was also intuitive for me. I believed that children learn language
by listening to the speech of their parents and those around them. This perspective also turned out to be just the tip
of the iceberg compared to the topics we developed. For the last question: “Do you think that our language affects how
we think? Can you give an example of the connection between language and thought?” from the perspective of time I think
I answered accurately. I pointed out the differences between linguistic constructions, including: English and Polish,
which may affect the way we formulate and understand our thoughts. This belief was based on the observation that some
ideas and concepts are easier to express in one language than in another, which I think suggests that language has the
ability to shape the way we think.

Of all the topics covered in the course, I found the idea of the relationship between language and thinking the most
fascinating, especially in the context of the debate between the theories of liguists Steven Pinker and Lera Boroditsky.
In short, Pinker presents language as a tool for transmitting pre-formed thoughts, separate from language, while
Boroditsky emphasizes that language actively shapes the way we perceive and interpret the world. The clash of
perspectives and examples has made me more aware of the non-obvious relationships between language and thought, as well
as cases where language is omitted in creating a thought.

### The main idea

During class, we covered three main topics: languages and dialects, children's acquisition of their first language, and
the influence of language on formulating thoughts. The main idea that comes to mind when we combine these three topics
is to indicate language as a key tool that ensures our survival, acceptance in the group, development and domination
over other species, and the domination of some people over others. Our constant development has made the world so
complex that a single human mind, due to its limitations, is unable to fully comprehend it. However, we have developed
mechanisms that allow us not only to integrate with the world prepared by our ancestors, but also to collaborate in
shaping the world around us. This iterative approach, where existing knowledge is leveraged to generate new insights, is
depicted in *Figure 1*, symbolizing the transfer of knowledge across generations. However, every stick has two ends.
These mechanisms sometimes prove unreliable.

Topics discussed in the context of the book *The Knowledge Illusion* by Sloman and Fernbach (2017) revealed the tendency
of people to overestimate their knowledge and cognitive skills. Researchers have shown plenty of examples that show gaps
in people's analysis of information. One of the key experiments involved explaining the functioning of a toilet to
participants, with the results indicating that people tend to overestimate their knowledge even in basic matters.
Another example of such a tendency is the influence of social media on the results of the presidential elections in the
United States in 2016. Researchers found that during the presidential election period, there was more fake news on
Facebook favoring Donald Trump than Hillary Clinton. However, the authors of the article assessed that although the
presence of fake news was noticeable, their effectiveness in changing the electoral decision was limited. This shows
that some people, despite being exposed to false information, were able to verify it, and others, in accordance with the
idea of the "knowledge illusion", interpreted this information as true. The above example, in relation to the main idea,
shows how complex our world is, in which one group of people, already understanding certain information processing
mechanisms of the human mind. These people have discovered methods to intelligently, non-violently dominate the way of
thinking of other people.

Another interesting local phenomenon referring to the role of language as a tool for acceptance in a group is French
slang - Verlan. Researcher Rana Noor Mohamed examines the Académie Française's position on preserving the purity of the
French language and its reluctance to recognize Verlan as an integral part of it. This case relates to two parts of the
main idea. First, Verlan slang provides a sense of belonging for those who speak it, which from an evolutionary
perspective may increase our chances of survival by working with people who identify with them. On the other hand, the
position of the Académie Française shows how language can also be subject to domination towards groups of people.

The topic of the influence of language on the way of thinking is most interesting to me because of cases from everyday
life. For example, during conversations with my foreign-speaking friends, we compare English idioms and phrases and look
for equivalents of certain English constructions in our native languages. On time, by mistake I wished my French friend
luck using direct translation of idiom “fingers crossed” in Polish, which could be said as “I’m keeping my thumbs”. He
didn’t know what I meant and after a while, I realised what happened. French counterpart of mentioned idiom is the same
as English one and differs from Polish therefore he can’t understand me. However, when we were talking about this later
with our German friend we found out that in German they say “squeeze thumbs”, which is close to Polish language and in
the same situation I described, if I would say this incorrect English phrase not to French, but for German person I
would be understood. It turns out that some concepts are expressed more precisely in one language and others in the
other. Another interesting phenomenon I have observed is the use of first language expressions translated literally into
English. Loan translations may be incomprehensible to native English speakers, but for those who speak French or German
and have an equivalent expression, understanding is not an issue. There are also cases in which it is difficult to look
for equivalents in other languages. An example is the use of a double negative, characteristic of Slavic languages. For
me, as a person for whom Polish is my first language, such a construction is natural and does not mean a double negation
of thoughts. However, for a French-speaking person, such wording makes no sense. In turn, the example structure of
Verlan slang would be impossible to implement in Polish due to the sound system. The French language, even if the words
are reversed, remains fluent, while the Polish language would become impossible to pronounce.

### Conclusion

A better grasp of why we use language and how it relates to our thoughts is certainly beneficial in daily life,
especially in my work as a programmer where clarity is essential in speech, writing, and code production. A fascinating
area for further investigation is the discrepancies that result from thinking in the first language compared to a later
acquired languages.

Allcott, Gentzkow, (2017). *Social Media and Fake News in the 2016 Election*

[https://www.nber.org/papers/w23089](https://www.nber.org/papers/w23089)

Mohamed, (2021). *Negotiating Alternative Linguistic Practices: The Struggle between Verlan Usage and the Académie
Française*

[https://makingsjournal.com/negotiating-alternative-linguistic-practices-the-struggle-between-verlan-usage-and-the-academie-francaise/](https://makingsjournal.com/negotiating-alternative-linguistic-practices-the-struggle-between-verlan-usage-and-the-academie-francaise/)

**Figure 1**

*Knowledge transfer*

![knowledge_transfer.png](What%20have%20I%20learned%20about%20language,%20thoughts,%20and%20%20acb743ba2c6e4f0287c7255bb9d36722/knowledge_transfer.png)
