Final_Project.md, before:

# What have I learned about language, thought, and the relationships between them? What do I not know yet? Final Project

### Rafał Jaskulski

### Introduction

At the beginning of the "Language and Thought" course, I was faced with three questions that made me think about my
current perception of language, the process of language acquisition and the impact it has on our thinking. The first
question, "What knowledge do we have about our first (native) language? What do we know when we say we know a language?"
seemed by this time for me to be not that difficult to determine. My answer was based on the belief that mutual
comprehension is enough, which later turned out to be incomplete. The answer to the second question, "How do children
learn their first language between the ages 0 and 1?" was also intuitive for me. I believed that children learn language
by listening to the speech of their parents and those around them. This perspective also turned out to be just the tip
of the iceberg compared to the topics we developed. For the last question, “Do you think that our language affects how
we think? Can you give an example of the connection between language and thought?” from the perspective of time I think
I answered accurately. I pointed out the differences between linguistic constructions, including English and Polish,
which may affect the way we formulate and understand our thoughts. This belief was based on the observation that some
ideas and concepts are easier to express in one language than in another, which I think suggests that language has the
ability to shape the way we think. Of all the topics covered in the course, I found the idea of the relationship between
language and thinking the most fascinating, especially in the context of the debate between the theories of liguists
Steven Pinker and Lera Boroditsky. In short, Pinker presents language as a tool for transmitting pre-formed thoughts,
separate from language, while Boroditsky emphasizes that language actively shapes the way we perceive and interpret the
world. The clash of perspectives and examples has made me more aware of the non-obvious relationships between language
and thought, as well as cases where language is omitted in creating a thought. The second idea that took my interest is
why language is that important for every human being, what’s the way languages are learned and especially the
consequences for human if they deprived of this opportunity. During the classes we have spoken about language
acquisition and what ability children have on a certain period of life, but I would need to delve deeper into topic if
and if so in which way abilities of adult for acquire new knowledge and skills are narrowed.

The topic of the influence of language on the way of thinking is most interesting to me because of cases from everyday
life. For example, during conversations with my foreign-speaking friends, we compare English idioms and phrases and look
for equivalents of certain English constructions in our native languages. Once, I unintentionally wished my French
friend good luck using direct translation of Polish idiom that represents “fingers crossed”, which in Polish could be
said as “I’m keeping my thumbs”. He did not understand what I meant and after a while, I realised what happened. The
French counterpart of the idiom is the same as the English one, but it differs from the Polish one, so he didn't
understand me. However, when discussing this later with our German friend we found out that in German they say “squeeze
thumbs”, which is similar to the Polish language. In the same situation I described, if I would say this incorrect
English phrase, not to French, but to German person I would be understood. The second example explores the meaning of
word in different languages. Some terms are expressed more precisely, or have explicit link with their root world. For
example, the term “diabetes” has its origin in Greek, but there is no explicit relation to disease it describes. On the
other hand in Polish, the word “diabetes” is called “cukrzyca”, which derived from the word “cukier”, meaning “sugar”,
and it precisely reflects the meaning. There are also cases in which it is challenging to find equivalents in other
languages. An example is the use of a double negative, characteristic of Slavic languages. For instance, a phrase “Ja
nic nie wiem” translated word by word means “I nothing no know”, or slightly reorganising it “I know not nothing”, which
does not make much sense in English, but for me, as a Polish speaker such a construction was perfectly normal until I
started noticing these language design differences. The last example is about describing time. I recently found that in
Spanish and Catalan, people describe the current time as plural, except for the first hour, which seems very strange to
me. In Polish, a single, specific moment in time is always singular, which in my opinion makes more sense in this
specific case. Another example that showed the influence of language on the formulation of thoughts is a study of
a way people with different first language categorise colors. The experiment of Boroditsky (2007) showed that Russian
speakers could discriminate between different shades of blue faster than English speakers, because the Russian language
has distinct terms for lighter blues ("goluboy") and darker blues ("siniy"), helping in quicker color categorization.

During class, we covered three main topics: languages and dialects, children's acquisition of their first language, and
the influence of language on formulating thoughts. The main idea that comes to mind when we combine these three topics
is to indicate language as a key tool that ensures our survival, acceptance in the group, development and domination
over other species, and the domination of some people over others. Our constant development has made the world so
complex that a single human mind, due to its limitations, is unable to fully comprehend it. However, we have developed
mechanisms that allow us not only to integrate with the world prepared by our ancestors, but also to collaborate in
shaping the world around us. This iterative approach, where existing knowledge is leveraged to generate new insights, is
depicted in *Figure 1*, symbolizing the transfer of knowledge across generations. However, every stick has two ends and
these mechanisms sometimes prove unreliable.

Topics discussed in the context of the book *The Knowledge Illusion* by Sloman and Fernbach (2017) revealed the tendency
of people to overestimate their knowledge and cognitive skills. Researchers have shown plenty of examples that show gaps
in people's analysis of information. One of the key experiments involved explaining the functioning of a toilet to
participants, with the results indicating that people tend to overestimate their knowledge even in basic matters.
Another example of such a tendency is the influence of social media on the results of the presidential elections in the
United States in 2016. Researchers found that during the presidential election period, there was more fake news on
Facebook favoring Donald Trump than Hillary Clinton. However, Allcott, Gentzkow (2017) assessed that although the
presence of fake news was noticeable, their effectiveness in changing the electoral decision was limited. This shows
that some people, despite being exposed to false information, were able to verify it, and others, in accordance with the
idea of the "knowledge illusion", interpreted this information as true. The above example, in relation to the main idea,
shows how complex our world is, in which one group of people, already understanding certain information processing
mechanisms of the human mind. These people have discovered methods to intelligently, non-violently dominate the way of
thinking of other people. Another interesting local phenomenon referring to the role of language as a tool for
acceptance in a group is French slang - Verlan. Researcher Rana Noor Mohamed examines the Académie Française's position
on preserving the purity of the French language and its reluctance to recognize Verlan as an integral part of it. This
case relates to two parts of the main idea. First, Verlan slang provides a sense of belonging for those who speak it,
which from an evolutionary perspective may increase our chances of survival by working with people who identify with
them. On the other hand, the position of the Académie Française shows how language can also be subject to domination
towards groups of people.

A better grasp of why we use language and how it relates to our thoughts is certainly beneficial in daily life,
especially in my work as a programmer where clarity is essential in speech, writing, and code production. A fascinating
area for further investigation is the discrepancies that result from thinking in the first language compared to a later
acquired languages.

Winawer, Witthoft, Frank, Wu, Wade, Boroditsky, (2007). *Russian blues reveal effects of language on color
discrimination*

[https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/17470790/](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/17470790/)

Allcott, Gentzkow, (2017). *Social Media and Fake News in the 2016 Election*

[https://www.nber.org/papers/w23089](https://www.nber.org/papers/w23089)

Mohamed, (2021). *Negotiating Alternative Linguistic Practices: The Struggle between Verlan Usage and the Académie
Française*

[https://makingsjournal.com/negotiating-alternative-linguistic-practices-the-struggle-between-verlan-usage-and-the-academie-francaise/](https://makingsjournal.com/negotiating-alternative-linguistic-practices-the-struggle-between-verlan-usage-and-the-academie-francaise/)

**Figures:**
![knowledge_transfer.png](What%20have%20I%20learned%20about%20language,%20thoughts,%20and%20%20acb743ba2c6e4f0287c7255bb9d36722/knowledge_transfer.png)
**Figure 1.** Knowledge transfer [Author’s own]

Commit message:

Add examples about lack of first language acquisition

Final_Project.md, after:

# What have I learned about language, thought, and the relationships between them? What do I not know yet? Final Project

### Rafał Jaskulski

### Introduction

At the beginning of the "Language and Thought" course, I was faced with three questions that made me think about my
current perception of language, the process of language acquisition and the impact it has on our thinking. The first
question, "What knowledge do we have about our first (native) language? What do we know when we say we know a language?"
seemed by this time for me to be not that difficult to determine. My answer was based on the belief that mutual
comprehension is enough, which later turned out to be incomplete. The answer to the second question, "How do children
learn their first language between the ages 0 and 1?" was also intuitive for me. I believed that children learn language
by listening to the speech of their parents and those around them. This perspective also turned out to be just the tip
of the iceberg compared to the topics we developed. For the last question, “Do you think that our language affects how
we think? Can you give an example of the connection between language and thought?” from the perspective of time I think
I answered accurately. I pointed out the differences between linguistic constructions, including English and Polish,
which may affect the way we formulate and understand our thoughts. This belief was based on the observation that some
ideas and concepts are easier to express in one language than in another, which I think suggests that language has the
ability to shape the way we think. Of all the topics covered in the course, I found the idea of the relationship between
language and thinking the most fascinating, especially in the context of the debate between the theories of liguists
Steven Pinker and Lera Boroditsky. In short, Pinker presents language as a tool for transmitting pre-formed thoughts,
separate from language, while Boroditsky emphasizes that language actively shapes the way we perceive and interpret the
world. The clash of perspectives and examples has made me more aware of the non-obvious relationships between language
and thought, as well as cases where language is omitted in creating a thought. The second idea that took my interest is
why language is that important for every human being, what’s the way languages are learned and especially the
consequences for human if they deprived of this opportunity. During the classes we have spoken about language
acquisition and what ability children have on a certain period of life, but I would need to delve deeper into topic if
and if so in which way abilities of adult for acquire new knowledge and skills are narrowed.

The topic of the influence of language on the way of thinking is most interesting to me because of cases from everyday
life. For example, during conversations with my foreign-speaking friends, we compare English idioms and phrases and look
for equivalents of certain English constructions in our native languages. Once, I unintentionally wished my French
friend good luck using direct translation of Polish idiom that represents “fingers crossed”, which in Polish could be
said as “I’m keeping my thumbs”. He did not understand what I meant and after a while, I realised what happened. The
French counterpart of the idiom is the same as the English one, but it differs from the Polish one, so he didn't
understand me. However, when discussing this later with our German friend we found out that in German they say “squeeze
thumbs”, which is similar to the Polish language. In the same situation I described, if I would say this incorrect
English phrase, not to French, but to German person I would be understood. The second example explores the meaning of
word in different languages. Some terms are expressed more precisely, or have explicit link with their root world. For
example, the term “diabetes” has its origin in Greek, but there is no explicit relation to disease it describes. On the
other hand in Polish, the word “diabetes” is called “cukrzyca”, which derived from the word “cukier”, meaning “sugar”,
and it precisely reflects the meaning. There are also cases in which it is challenging to find equivalents in other
languages. An example is the use of a double negative, characteristic of Slavic languages. For instance, a phrase “Ja
nic nie wiem” translated word by word means “I nothing no know”, or slightly reorganising it “I know not nothing”, which
does not make much sense in English, but for me, as a Polish speaker such a construction was perfectly normal until I
started noticing these language design differences. The last example is about describing time. I recently found that in
Spanish and Catalan, people describe the current time as plural, except for the first hour, which seems very strange to
me. In Polish, a single, specific moment in time is always singular, which in my opinion makes more sense in this
specific case. Another example that showed the influence of language on the formulation of thoughts is a study of
a way people with different first language categorise colors. The experiment of Boroditsky (2007) showed that Russian
speakers could discriminate between different shades of blue faster than English speakers, because the Russian language
has distinct terms for lighter blues ("goluboy") and darker blues ("siniy"), helping in quicker color categorization.

During class, we covered three main topics: languages and dialects, children's acquisition of their first language, and
the influence of language on formulating thoughts. The main idea that comes to mind when we combine these three topics
is to indicate language as a key tool that ensures our survival, acceptance in the group, development and domination
over other species, and the domination of some people over others. Our constant development has made the world so
complex that a single human mind, due to its limitations, is unable to fully comprehend it. However, we have developed
mechanisms that allow us not only to integrate with the world prepared by our ancestors, but also to collaborate in
shaping the world around us. This iterative approach, where existing knowledge is leveraged to generate new insights, is
depicted in *Figure 1*, symbolizing the transfer of knowledge across generations. However, every stick has two ends and
these mechanisms sometimes prove unreliable.

Topics discussed in the context of the book *The Knowledge Illusion* by Sloman and Fernbach (2017) revealed the tendency
of people to overestimate their knowledge and cognitive skills. Researchers have shown plenty of examples that show gaps
in people's analysis of information. One of the key experiments involved explaining the functioning of a toilet to
participants, with the results indicating that people tend to overestimate their knowledge even in basic matters.
Another example of such a tendency is the influence of social media on the results of the presidential elections in the
United States in 2016. Researchers found that during the presidential election period, there was more fake news on
Facebook favoring Donald Trump than Hillary Clinton. However, Allcott, Gentzkow (2017) assessed that although the
presence of fake news was noticeable, their effectiveness in changing the electoral decision was limited. This shows
that some people, despite being exposed to false information, were able to verify it, and others, in accordance with the
idea of the "knowledge illusion", interpreted this information as true. The above example, in relation to the main idea,
shows how complex our world is, in which one group of people, already understanding certain information processing
mechanisms of the human mind. These people have discovered methods to intelligently, non-violently dominate the way of
thinking of other people. Another interesting local phenomenon referring to the role of language as a tool for
acceptance in a group is French slang - Verlan. Researcher Rana Noor Mohamed examines the Académie Française's position
on preserving the purity of the French language and its reluctance to recognize Verlan as an integral part of it. This
case relates to two parts of the main idea. First, Verlan slang provides a sense of belonging for those who speak it,
which from an evolutionary perspective may increase our chances of survival by working with people who identify with
them. On the other hand, the position of the Académie Française shows how language can also be subject to domination
towards groups of people. Another example illustrates the consequences of depriving a human being from first language
acquisition. In the book How Languages are Learned, Lightbown, Spada (2006) researchers showed an example of child that
was about 12 years old when found, and probably he had got no contact with aby human before. Even though several years
were devoted to teaching him the language, the child was no longer able to develop the cognitive skills to the extent
that toddlers do. A similar case, but  happend to Grzegorz Płonka, a child that since birth was wrongly diagnosed with autism
and in his fourteenth it turned out that he has hearing loss. After that he got an implant that bring him the hear back,
he started to develop his hearing skills. It turns out that he is musically talented and after a few years of hard work
he played a piece Sonata. This example shows how huge influence has contact with a first language from the moment of
being a fetus. The history of Płonka was so extraordinary that a movie adapting his biography called Sonata (2021) was
made.

A better grasp of why we use language and how it relates to our thoughts is certainly beneficial in daily life,
especially in my work as a programmer where clarity is essential in speech, writing, and code production. A fascinating
area for further investigation is the discrepancies that result from thinking in the first language compared to a later
acquired languages.

Winawer, Witthoft, Frank, Wu, Wade, Boroditsky, (2007). *Russian blues reveal effects of language on color
discrimination*

[https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/17470790/](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/17470790/)

Allcott, Gentzkow, (2017). *Social Media and Fake News in the 2016 Election*

[https://www.nber.org/papers/w23089](https://www.nber.org/papers/w23089)

Mohamed, (2021). *Negotiating Alternative Linguistic Practices: The Struggle between Verlan Usage and the Académie
Française*

[https://makingsjournal.com/negotiating-alternative-linguistic-practices-the-struggle-between-verlan-usage-and-the-academie-francaise/](https://makingsjournal.com/negotiating-alternative-linguistic-practices-the-struggle-between-verlan-usage-and-the-academie-francaise/)

**Figures:**
![knowledge_transfer.png](What%20have%20I%20learned%20about%20language,%20thoughts,%20and%20%20acb743ba2c6e4f0287c7255bb9d36722/knowledge_transfer.png)
**Figure 1.** Knowledge transfer [Author’s own]

**Movie**:

https://blog.medel.com/userstories/grzegorz-plonka-cochlear-implant/

https://www.imdb.com/video/vi1694941721

The continuation of history of changes could be found again here:
https://github.com/Rafikooo/thought-language/commits/main/
